[[intro]]
== Introduction

Control-flow Integrity (CFI) provides CPU instruction set architecture (ISA)
capabilities to defend against Return-Oriented Programming (ROP) and
Call/Jump-Oriented Programming (COP/JOP) style control-flow subversion attacks.
This attack methodology uses code sequences in authorized modules, with at least
one instruction in the sequence being a control transfer instruction that
depends on attacker-controlled data either in the return stack or in a
register/memory for the target address. Attackers stitch these sequences
together by diverting the control flow instruction (e.g., RET, CALL, JMP) from
its original target address to a new target via modification in the return stack
or in the register or memory used by these instructions.

This specification describes CFI threat model, security objectives and
the architectural design choices to ensure that control-flow subversion
attacks are effectively thwarted.

RV32/RV64 provide two types of control transfer instructions - unconditional
jumps and conditional branches. Conditional branches encode an offset in the
immediate field of the instruction and are thus direct branches that are not
susceptible to control-flow subversion.

Unconditional direct jumps using `JAL` transfer control to a target that is in a
+/- 1 MiB range from the current `pc`. Unconditional indirect jumps using the
`JALR` obtain their branch target by adding the sign extended 12-bit immediate
encoded in the instruction to the `rs1` register.

The RV32I/RV64I does not have a dedicated instruction for calling a procedure or
returning from a procedure. A `JAL` or `JALR` may be used to perform either a
procedure call or a return from a procedure. The RISC-V ABI however defines the
convention that a `JAL`/`JALR` where `rd` (i.e. the link register) is `x1` or
`x5` is a procedure call, and a `JAL`/`JALR` where `rs1` is the conventional
link register (i.e. `x1` or `x5`) is a return from procedure. The architecture
allows for using these hints and conventions to support return address
prediction. The hints are specified in Table 2.1 of the Unprivileged ISA
specifications cite:[UNPRIV].

The RVC standard extension for compressed instructions provides unconditional
jump and conditional branch instructions. The `C.J` and `C.JAL` instructions
encode an offset in the immediate field of the instruction and thus are not
susceptible to control-flow subversion.

The `C.JR` and `C.JALR` RVC instruction performs an unconditional control
transfer to the address in register `rs1`. The `C.JALR` additionally writes the
address of the instruction following the jump (`pc+2`) to the link register `x1`
and is a procedure call. The `C.JR` is a return from procedure if `rs1` is a
conventional link register (i.e. `x1` or `x5`); else it is an indirect jump.

The RISC-V control-flow integrity (CFI) extension (Zicfisslp) builds on these
conventions and hints.

The term "call" is used to refer to a `JAL` or `JALR` instruction with a link
register as destination, i.e., `rd != x0`. Conventionally, the link register is
`x1` or `x5`. A call using `JAL` or `C.JAL` is termed a direct call. A `C.JALR`
expands to `JALR x1, 0(rs1)` and is a call. A call using `JALR` or `C.JALR` is
termed an indirect call.

The term "return" is used to refer to a `JALR` instruction with `rs1 == x1` or
`rs1 == x5` and `rd == x0`. A `C.JR` instruction expands to `JALR x0, 0(rs1)`
and is a return if `rs1 == x1` or `rs1 == x5`.

The term "indirect jump" is used to refer to a `JALR` instruction with `rd == x0`
and where the `rs1` is not `x1` or `x5` (i.e., not a return). A `C.JR`
instruction where `rs1` is not `x1` or `x5` (i.e., not a return) is an indirect
jump.

To enforce backward-edge control-flow integrity, the extension introduces a
shadow stack. The shadow stack is designed to provide integrity to control
transfers performed using return instructions (where the return may be from a
procedure invoked using an indirect call or a direct call), and this is referred
to as backward-edge protection. A program using backward-edge control-flow
integrity has two stacks: a regular stack and a shadow stack. The shadow stack
is used exclusively to store shadow copies of return addresses.

The shadow stack is used to spill the link register if required by non-leaf
functions. An additional register, shadow-stack-pointer (`ssp`), is introduced
in the architecture to hold the address of the top of the current active shadow
stack. The shadow stack is architecturally protected from inadvertent
corruptions and modifications, as detailed later. The extension provides
instructions to store and load the link register to/from the shadow stack and to
check the integrity of the return address.

Each function in a program that uses a shadow stack stores the link register to
the regular stack and a shadow copy of the link register to the shadow stack
when the function is entered (the prologue). When the function needs to return
(the epilogue), the function loads the link register from the regular stack and
the shadow copy of the link register from the shadow stack. The link register
value from the regular stack and the shadow link register value from the shadow
stack are compared. A mismatch of the two values is indicative of a subversion
of the return address control variable and causes an illegal-instruction
exception.

[NOTE]
====
Programs that use the shadow stack can operate in two modes: a shadow stack mode
or a control stack mode. In shadow stack mode, programs store the return
addresses on both the regular stack and the shadow stack in the function
prologue, and then pop them them from both stacks and compare the values before
returning from the function. In the control stack mode, programs only store the
return addresses on the shadow stack and pop it from there to return from the
function.

Operating in shadow stack mode preserves the call stack layout and the ABI,
while also allowing for the detection of corruption of the return address on
the regular stack. Such programs are portable between implementations that
support the Zicfisslp extension as well as those that do not. Most programs are
expected to use this mode.

Operating in control stack mode breaks the ABI, but has the benefit of avoiding
additional instructions to store the return address to two stacks, and to pop
and compare them before returning from a function. This mode also allows the
program to have a smaller regular stack as the space to save the return address
is not needed. However, such programs are not portable to implementations that
do not support the Zicfisslp extension. Some just-in-time (JIT) compiled
programs may dynamically switch between using only the regular stack or only the
shadow stack to store return addresses, depending on the capabilities of the
implementation.
====

To enforce forward edge control-flow integrity, Zicfisslp extension introduces
landing pad instructions that allow software to indicate valid targets for
indirect calls and jumps in a program. Compilers emit a landing pad instruction
as the first instruction of address-taken functions, as well as at any indirect
jump targets.

The landing pads are designed to provide integrity to control transfers
performed using indirect call and jumps, and this is referred to as forward-edge
protection.

When the landing pad feature is active, the hart tracks an expected landing pad
(`ELP`) that is updated by an indirect call or jump to require a landing pad
instruction at the target. If the instruction at the target is not a landing pad,
then an illegal-instruction exception is raised.

The landing pads may be labeled. With labeling enabled, the number of landing
pads that can be reached from an indirect call or jump site can be defined using
programming language-based policies. A landing pad label (`lpl`) register is set
up prior to initiating an indirect call or jump with the expected landing pad
label. If the target of the indirect call or jump is not a landing pad or if the
label of the landing pad does not match the label in `lpl` then an
illegal-instruction exception is raised. Up to 25-bit wide labels are supported.

[NOTE]
====
In the simplest form, a program can be built with a single label value to
implement a coarse-grained version of forward-edge control-flow integrity. By
constraining gadgets to be preceded by a landing pad instruction that marks
the start of indirect callable functions, the program can significantly reduce
the available gadget space.

A second form of label generation may generate a signature, such as a MAC, using
the prototype of the function. Programs that use this approach would further
constrain the gadgets accessible from a call site to only indirect callable
functions that match the prototype of the called functions.

Another approach to label generation involves analyzing the control-flow-graph
(CFG) of the program, which can lead to even more stringent constraints on the
set of reachable gadgets. Such programs may further use the multi-label
capability, which means that if a function is called from two or more call
sites, the common functions can be labeled as reachable from each of the call
sites.

For instance, consider two call sites A and B, where A calls functions X
and Y, and B calls functions Y and Z. In a single label scheme, functions X, Y,
and Z would need to be assigned the same label so that both call sites A and B
can invoke the common function Y. This scheme would allow call site A to also
call function Z and call site B to also call function X.

However, if function Y was assigned two labels - one corresponding to call site
A and the other to call site B, then Y can be invoked by both call sites, but X
can only be invoked by call site A and Z can only be invoked by call site B.

To support multiple labels, the compiler could generate a call-site-specific
entry point for shared functions, with each entry point having its own landing
pad instruction followed by a direct branch to the start of the function. This
would allow the function to be labeled with multiple labels, each corresponding
to a specific call site.

A portion of the label space may be dedicated to labeled landing pads that are
only valid targets of an indirect jump (and not an indirect call).

====

Forward-edge and backward-edge CFI may be activated independently for software
that executes in U-mode, S-mode, or M-mode. The processor keeps track of the CFI
activation and CFI state for each mode in the `mstatus` CSR. A subset of the
fields in the `mstatus` CSR is accessible using the `sstatus` CSR. VS-mode’s
version of `sstatus` (`vsstatus`) tracks the CFI state for VS-mode and VU-mode.

[NOTE]
====
The operating system may activate the use of Zicfisslp by U-mode applications,
with or without the extension being used by the operating system itself. The set
of U-mode programs installed in an OS may be a mix, where some programs are
compiled with Zicfisslp capabilities and others that are not. The operating
system can activate or deactivate the use of the extension in U-mode per
application by context switching the Zicfisslp state.

Hypervisors may activate the use of Zicfisslp in a virtual machine, with or
without the extension being used by the hypervisor itself. Virtual machines that
use the extension may coexist with virtual machines that do not, with the
hypervisor context switching the Zicfisslp state of each virtual machine.

To use Zicfisslp, the operating system and hypervisors have to be modified to
use the capabilities, including the context switching of the extension state.

Machine mode firmware may activate the use of the extension in M-mode independent
of its use in lower privilege modes.
====

The Zicfisslp instructions are encoded using a subset of "May be op"
instructions defined by the Zimop and Zcmop extensions. This subset of
instructions reverts to their Zimop/Zcmop defined behavior when the Zicfisslp
extension is not implemented or if the extension has not been activated at a
privilege mode. A program that is built with Zicfisslp instructions can thus
continue to operate correctly, but without control-flow integrity, on processors
that do not support the extension or if the extension is not active.

[NOTE]
====
Compilers should flag each object file (for example, using flags in the elf
attributes) to indicate if the object file has been compiled with the Zicfisslp
instructions. The linker should flag (for example, using flags in the elf
attributes) the binary/executable generated by linking objects as being compiled
with the Zicfisslp only if all the object files that are linked have the same
Zicfisslp attributes.

The dynamic loader should enable the use of Zicfisslp extension for a process
only if all executables (the application and the dependent dynamically linked
libraries) used by that process have the same Zicfisslp attributes. When the use
of the extension is not enabled for a process then the Zicfisslp instructions in
that application or in the dynamically linked libraries invoked by that
process revert to their Zimop/Zcmop defined behavior. This allows the program
to functionally execute but without control-flow integrity.

A process that has the Zicfisslp extension enabled may request the dynamic
loader at runtime to load a new dynamic shared object (using dlopen() for
example). If the requested object does not have the Zicfisslp attribute then
the dynamic loader, based on its policy (e.g, established by the operating
system or the administrator) configuration, either fail the request or disable
the extension for the process. If the extension is disabled then the Zicfisslp
instructions revert to their Zimop/Zcmop defined behavior and the program
continues to functionally execute but without control-flow integrity.

An OS modified to support the Zicfisslp extension typically includes system
libraries (such as glibc) that are also compiled with the Zicfisslp extension.
However, these system libraries may need to dynamically link to programs that
are not compiled with the Zicfisslp extension. In such cases, when these
programs are executed in user mode, the OS may disable the Zicfisslp extension.
When the Zicfisslp instructions in the system libraries are invoked by these
programs in user mode, they revert to their Zimop/Zcmop defined behavior. The OS
only needs to carry one version of the system libraries, which are usable by
both applications that use the extension and those that do not.

An OS distribution compiled with Zicfisslp extension may be installed on a
machine that does not support the extension. In such cases, the Zicfisslp
instructions revert to their Zimop/Zcmop defined behavior. This allows a single
OS image distribution to support machines that support the Zicfisslp extension
and those that do not.

If a program compiled with the Zicfisslp extension is installed on an operating
system that does not support the Zicfisslp extension or on a machine that does
not support it, the Zicfisslp instructions will revert to their Zimop/Zcmop
defined behavior. This allows an application developer to distribute a single
application image that can be used on machines and/or OS installations with
support for the Zicfisslp extension and those that do not.
====

The Zicfisslp extension depends on the Zicsr, A, Zimop, and Zcmop extensions.
