[[intro]]
== Introduction

Control-flow Integrity (CFI) capabilities help defend against Return-Oriented
Programming (ROP) and Call/Jump-Oriented Programming (COP/JOP) style
control-flow subversion attacks. These attack methodologies use code sequences
in authorized modules, with at least one instruction in the sequence being a
control transfer instruction that depends on attacker-controlled data either in
the return stack or in memory used to obtain the target address for a call or
jump. Attackers stitch these sequences together by diverting the control flow
instructions (e.g., `JALR`, `C.JR`, `C.JALR`), from their original target
address to a new target via modification in the return stack or in the memory
used to obtain the jump/call target address.

RV32/RV64 provides two types of control transfer instructions - unconditional
jumps and conditional branches. Conditional branches encode an offset in the
immediate field of the instruction and are thus direct branches that are not
susceptible to control-flow subversion. Unconditional direct jumps using `JAL`
transfer control to a target that is in a +/- 1 MiB range from the current `pc`.
Unconditional indirect jumps using the `JALR` obtain their branch target by
adding the sign extended 12-bit immediate encoded in the instruction to the
`rs1` register.

The RV32I/RV64I does not have a dedicated instruction for calling a procedure or
returning from a procedure. A `JAL` or `JALR` may be used to perform a procedure
call and `JALR` to return from a procedure. The RISC-V ABI however defines the
convention that a `JAL`/`JALR` where `rd` (i.e. the link register) is `x1` or
`x5` is a procedure call, and a `JALR` where `rs1` is the conventional
link register (i.e. `x1` or `x5`) is a return from procedure. The architecture
allows for using these hints and conventions to support return address
prediction. The hints are specified in Table 3 of the Unprivileged ISA
specifications cite:[UNPRIV].

The RVC standard extension for compressed instructions provides unconditional
jump and conditional branch instructions. The `C.J` and `C.JAL` instructions
encode an offset in the immediate field of the instruction and thus are not
susceptible to control-flow subversion. The `C.JR` and `C.JALR` RVC instructions
perform an unconditional control transfer to the address in register `rs1`. The
`C.JALR` additionally writes the address of the instruction following the jump
(`pc+2`) to the link register `x1` and is a procedure call. The `C.JR` is a
return from procedure if `rs1` is a conventional link register (i.e. `x1` or
`x5`); else it is an indirect jump.

The term _call_ is used to refer to a `JAL` or `JALR` instruction with a link
register as destination, i.e., `rd != x0`. Conventionally, the link register is
`x1` or `x5`. A _call_ using `JAL` or `C.JAL` is termed a direct call. A
`C.JALR` expands to `JALR x1, 0(rs1)` and is a _call_. A _call_ using `JALR` or
`C.JALR` is termed an _indirect-call_.

The term _return_ is used to refer to a `JALR` instruction with `rd == x0` and
with `rs1 == x1` or `rs1 == x5`. A `C.JR` instruction expands to
`JALR x0, 0(rs1)` and is a _return_ if `rs1 == x1` or `rs1 == x5`.

The term _indirect-jump_ is used to refer to a `JALR` instruction with `rd == x0`
and where the `rs1` is not `x1` or `x5` (i.e., not a return). A `C.JR`
instruction where `rs1` is not `x1` or `x5` (i.e., not a return) is an
_indirect-jump_.

The Zicfiss and Zicfilp extensions build on these conventions and hints and
provide backward-edge and forward-edge control flow integrity respectively. The
Zicfilp extension is specified in <<forward>> and the Zicfiss extension is
specified in <<backward>>.
